162 T E M O R A: Book VIII
--
of broad-ſhielded Cairbar, from Ullin of the
roes. He liſtens to the voice of Condan, as,
grey, he bends in feeble light. He liſtens, for
his foes dwell in the ecchoing halls ef Temora.
--
He
==
ceeded him, and Ros-crana, the firſt wife of Fingal. Cair-
bar, long before the death of his father Cormac, had taken
to wife Bos-gala, the daughter of Colgar, one of the moſt
powerful chiefs in Connaught, and had, by her, Artho,
afterwards king of ſreland. Soon after Artho arrived at man's
eſtate, his mother Bos-gala died, and Cairbar married Bel-
tanno, the daughter of Conachar of Ullin, who brought him
a ſon, whom he called Ferad artho, i. e. {{a man in the place of
Artho}}. The occaſion of the name was this. Artho, when his
brother was born, was abſent, on an expedition, in the ſouth
of Ireland. A falſe report was brought to his father, that he
was killed. {{Cairbar}}, to uſe the words of a poem on the ſub-
ject, {{darkened for his fair-haired ſon. He turned to the young
beam of light, the ſon of Baltanno of Conachar. Thou ſhalt be
Farad-artho, he ſaid, a fire before thy race}}. Cairbar, ſoon
after, died, nor did Artho long ſurvive him. Artho was ſuc-
ceeded, in the Iriſh throne, by his ſon Cormac, who, in his
minority, was murdered by Cairbar, the ſon of Borbar-duthul.
Ferad-artho, ſays tradition, was very young, when the expe-
dition of Fingal, to ſettle him on the throne of Ireland, hap-
pened. During the ſhort reign of young Cormac, Ferad-
artho lived at the royal reſidence of Temora. Upon the murder
of the king, Condan, the bard, conveyed Ferad-artho, pri-
vately, to the cave of Cluna, behind the mountain Crommal, in
Ulſter, where they both lived concealed, during the ufurpation
of the family of Atha. A late bard has delivered the whole
hiſtory, in a poem juſt now in my poſſeſſion. It has little me-
rit, if we except the ſcene between Ferad-artho, and the meſ-
ſengers of Fingal, upon their arrival, in the valley of Cluna.
After hearing of the great actions of Fingal, the young prince
propoſes the following queſtions concerning him, to Gaul and
Dermid, `` Is the king tall as the rock of my cave? Is his
==
ſpear

