--
_ARGUMENT to {Book} I._
Cairbar, the ſon of Borbar-duthul, lord of Atha in Connaught
the moſt potent chief of the race of the Firbolg, having
murdered, at Temora the royal palace, Cormac the ſon of
Artho, the young king of Ireland, uſurped the throne. Cor-
mac was lineally deſcended from Conar the ſon of Trenmor,
the great grandfather of Fingal, king of thoſe Caledonians
who inhabited the weſtern coaſt of Scotland. Fingal re-
ſented the behaviour of Cairbar, and reſolved to paſs over
into Ireland, with an army, to re-eſtabliſh the royal family
on the Iriſh throne. Early intelligence of his deſigns com-
ing to Cairbar, he aſſembled ſome of his tribes in Ulſter, and
at the ſame time ordered his brother Cathmor to follow him
ſpeedily with an army, from Temora. Such was the ſitua-
tion of affairs when the Caledonian invaders appeared on
the coaſt of Ulſter.

The poem opens in the morning. Cairbar is repreſented
as retired from the reſt of the army, when one of his ſcouts
brought him news of the landing of Fingal. He aſſembles a
council of his chiefs. Foldath the chief of Morna haughtily
deſpiſes the enemy ; and is reprimanded warmly by Mal-
thos. Cairbar, after hearing their debate, orders a feaſt to
be prepared, to which, by his bard Olla, he invites Oſcar
the ſon of Ofſian ; reſolving to pick a quarrel with that
hero, and ſo have ſome pretext for killing him. Oſcar
came to the feaſt; the quarrel happened ; the followers of
both fought, and Cairbar and Oſcar fell by mutual wounds.
The noiſe of the battle reached Fingal's army. The king
came on, to the relief of Oſcar, and the Iriſh fell back to
the army of Cathmor, who was advanced to the banks of
the river Lubar, on the heath of Moilena. Fingal, after
mourning over his grandſon, ordered Ullin the chief of his
bards to carry his body to Morven, to be there interred,
Night coming on, Althan, the ſon of Conachar, relates to
the king the particulars of the murder of Cormac. Fillan,
the ſon of Fingal, is ſent to obſerve the motions of Cath-
mar by night, which concludes the action of the firſt day.
The ſcene of this book is a plain, near the hill of Mora,
which roſe on the borders of the heath of Moilena, in Ulſter.
&end;
--

