--
_ARGUMENT._
This poem is compleat, and the ſubject of it, as of moſt of
Oſſian's compoſitions, tragical. In the time of Comhal the
ſon of Trathal, and father of the celebrated Fingal, Cleſs-
&aacute;mmor the ſon of Thaddu and brother of Morna, Fingal's
mother, was driven by a ſtorm into the river Clyde, on the
banks of which ſtood Balclutha, a town belonging to the
Britons between the walls. He was hoſpitably received by
Reuth&aacute;mir, the principal man in the place, who gave him
Moina his only daughter in marriage. Reuda, the ſon of
Cormo, a Briton who was in love with Moina, came to
Reuthamir's houſe, and behaved haughtily towards Cleſs-
&aacute;ammor. A quarrel inſued, in which Reada was killed ;
the Britons, who attended him preſſed ſo hard on Cleſs-
&aacute;mmor, that he was obliged to throw himſelf into the
Clyde, and ſwim to his ſhip. He hoiſted ſail, and the
wind being favourable, bore him out to ſea. He often en-
deavoured to return, and carry off his beloved Moina by
night; but the wind continuing contrary, he was forced to
deſift.

Moina, who had been left with child by her huſband,
brought forth a ſon, and died ſoon after. — Reuthimir
named the child Carthon, {{i. e. the murmur of waves}}, from
the ſtorm which carried off Cleſs&aacute;mmer his father, who was
ſuppoſed to have been caſt away. When Carthon was
three years old, Comhal the father of Fingal, in one of his
expeditions againſt the Britons, took and burnt Balclutha,
Reuthamir was killed in the attack: and Carthon was car-
ried ſafe away by his nurſe, who fled farther into the coun-
try of the Britons. Carthon, coming to man's eſtate was
reſolved to revenge the fall of Balclutha on Comhal's poſte-
rity. He ſet fail, from the Clyde, and, falling on the
coaſt of Morven, defeated two of Fingal's heroes, who came
to oppoſe his progreſs. He was, at laſt, unwittingly killed
by his father Cleſs&aacute;mmor, in a ſingle combat. This ſtory is
the ſoundation of the preſent poem, which opens on the
night preceding the death of Carthon, ſo that what paſſed
before is introduced by way of epiſode. The poem is ad-
dreſſed to Malvina the daughter of Toſcar.
&end;
--

