DUAN FIRST. 7
--
briſtly ſtrength of I-thorno rolled on his lifted
ſpear. Tell him of my deeds in war ! Tell
where his father fell!''
==this paragraph, is ſo anxious to recommend to him. As I
have mentioned the traditional tales of the Highlands, it may
not be improper here, to give ſome account of them. After
the expulſion of the bards, from the houſes of the chiefs,
they, being an indolent race of men, owed all their ſubſiſtence
to the generoſity of the vulgar, whom they diverted with re-
peating tne compoſitions of their predeceſſors, and running
up the genealogies of their entertainers to the family of their
chiefs. As this ſubject was, however, ſoon exhauſted, they
were obliged to have recourſe to invention, and form ſtories
having no ſoundation in fact which were ſwallowed, with great
credulity, by an ignorant multitude. By frequent repeating,
the fable grew upon their hands, and, as each threw in what-
ever circumſtance he thought conducive to raiſe the admira-
tion of his hearers, the ſtory became, at laſt, ſo devoid of all
probability, that even the vulgar themſelves did nor believe
it. They, however, liked the tales ſo well, that the bards
ſound their advantage in turning profeſſed tale makers.
They then launched out into the wildeſt regions of fiction
and romance. I firmly believe, there are more ſtories of
giants, enchanted caſtles, dwarfs, and palfreys, in the High-
lands, than in any country in Europe. Theſe tales, it is
certain, like other romantic compoſitions, have many things
in them unnatural, and, conſequently, diſguſtful to true taſte,
but, I know not how it happens, they command attention
more than any other fictions I ever met with. The extreme
length of theſe pieces is very ſurpriſing, ſome of them re-
quiring many days to repeat them, but ſuch hold they take
of the memory, that few circumſtances are ever omitted by thoſe
who have received them only from oral tradition : What is ſtill
more amazing, the very language of the bards is ſtill preſerved.
It is curious to ſee, that the deſcriptions of magnificence, in-
troduced in theſe tales, is even ſuperior to all the pompous
oriental fictions of the kind.
==
B4 ``Not
